\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename docs/gpr-ts-mode.info
@settitle GNAT Project Major Mode using Tree-Sitter
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* GPR Tree-Sitter Mode: (gpr-ts-mode). GNAT Project Major Mode using Tree-Sitter.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title GNAT Project Major Mode using Tree-Sitter
@author Troy Brown
@end titlepage

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top GNAT Project Major Mode using Tree-Sitter

A major mode for GNAT Project (GPR) files, which utilizes the Emacs
built-in support for tree-sitter, first available starting with
Emacs 29.  The tree-sitter functionality is used to build an in-memory
concrete syntax tree of the parsed language, allowing operations such
as syntax highlighting to be performed more accurately than historical
methods (e.g., regular expressions).

This major mode provides support for syntax highlighting, indentation,
navigation, Imenu, and ``which function'' (i.e., displaying the current
function name in the mode line).

@strong{Note}: This major mode is based on the Emacs built-in tree-sitter
support, not to be confused with the separate Emacs tree-sitter
package.  The two are not compatible with each other.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Prerequisites::
* Installation::
* Grammar Installation::
* Syntax Highlighting::
* Indentation::
* Navigation / Imenu::
* Troubleshooting::
* Keystroke Index::
* Variable Index::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Installation

* From the Git Repository::

Troubleshooting

* Org Mode Source Code Blocks::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Prerequisites
@chapter Prerequisites

There are a number of requirements which must be met in order to use
tree-sitter powered major modes.  The Emacs documentation should be
consulted which will provide complete details.  The following are the
main points to consider:

@itemize
@item
Emacs must have been built with tree-sitter support.  Versions of
Emacs prior to Emacs 29 do not have built-in support.  The built-in
support is optionally enabled when Emacs is built, so you must make
sure that the version of Emacs that you are using was built with
tree-sitter support.
@item
The tree-sitter shared library must be installed on your system.
The specifics of how to do this will vary based on the Operating
System, so those details are not provided here for all platforms,
however an a Debian/Ubuntu installation, it would be similar to the
following:
@example
sudo apt install libtree-sitter0
@end example
If you're building Emacs from source, you'll need the development
library instead:
@example
sudo apt install libtree-sitter-dev
@end example
The following command can be used to determine if tree-sitter
support is enabled in Emacs and whether the tree-sitter library can
be found on your system:
@itemize
@item
@samp{M-: (treesit-available-p) RET}
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

This section will be expanded to cover additional installation methods
in the future.

@menu
* From the Git Repository::
@end menu

@node From the Git Repository
@section From the Git Repository

Installation directly from the source repository is possible using
@code{package-vc-install}.  The following command can be used to perform this
installation:

@samp{M-x package-vc-install RET https://github.com/brownts/gpr-ts-mode RET}

@node Grammar Installation
@chapter Grammar Installation

In order for gpr-ts-mode to be useful, it needs to have the specific
tree-sitter GPR language grammar library installed.  This library is
different from the tree-sitter library mentioned in the prerequisites
section (e.g., @samp{libtree-sitter.so} vs @samp{libtree-sitter-gpr.so}).  The
library is not bundled with gpr-ts-mode, but is maintained separately.
With the default configuration, the first time gpr-ts-mode is loaded
(in the absence of an existing installed library) it will prompt to
download, build and install the grammar library.  The following
settings provide control over this activity.

@vindex gpr-ts-mode-grammar
@table @asis
@item @code{gpr-ts-mode-grammar} (default: @uref{https://github.com/brownts/tree-sitter-gpr})
Location
of the tree-sitter GPR language grammar to be used by gpr-ts-mode.
@end table
@vindex gpr-ts-mode-grammar-install
@table @asis
@item @code{gpr-ts-mode-grammar-install} (default: @code{prompt})
Controls the level of
automation in installing the grammar library (automatic, prompt first,
etc).
@end table

In order to build the library, you will need to have a C compiler
installed.  Refer to the Emacs documentation surrounding
@code{treesit-install-language-grammar}, as gpr-ts-mode uses the built-in
Emacs functionality to perform the download, building and installation
of the library.

It's also possible to skip this step if you already have a pre-built
library for the language.  In which case, placing the pre-built
library in the correct location will allow gpr-ts-mode to find and use
the library.  You can customize @code{treesit-extra-load-path} to add extra
locations to search for libraries.

The @uref{https://github.com/brownts/tree-sitter-gpr#readme, README} for the GPR language grammar, provides instructions on
building the library from source if you'd rather perform that step
manually or don't have the correct toolchain installed in order for
this to be performed automatically.  You will only be prompted if the
library can't be found in one of the expected locations.  The
prompting can also be controlled by changing the
@code{gpr-ts-mode-grammar-install} setting.

If manually installing, or troubleshooting the installation of the GPR
language grammar, you can use the following to check whether Emacs can
locate the library:
@itemize
@item
@samp{M-: (treesit-ready-p 'gpr t) RET}
@item
Make sure it indicates @code{t} in the echo area instead of @code{nil}.
@end itemize

@node Syntax Highlighting
@chapter Syntax Highlighting

There are 4 different levels of syntax highlighting available,
providing an increasing amount of highlighting.  By default in Emacs,
level 3 (controlled by @code{treesit-font-lock-level}) is used to provide a
compromise between providing too little and too much fontification.
It should be noted that the levels are cumulative, meaning that each
level also includes all of the fontification in the levels below it.
The following provides the list of features and how they are mapped to
the different font lock levels.

@table @asis
@item Level 1
comment, definition
@item Level 2
keyword, string, type
@item Level 3
attribute, function, number, operator, package, variable
@item Level 4
bracket, delimiter, error
@end table

@node Indentation
@chapter Indentation

Indentation follows the nesting structure of the language.  Each
nested level is indented a fixed amount.  Thus the general indentation
offset governs the amount of this indentation.  Additional
configurations address special cases, such as the indentation of a
construct spanning multiple lines (i.e., broken indent).  The
following configurations can be used to customize these indentation
levels to match your own style.

@vindex gpr-ts-mode-indent-offset
@table @asis
@item @code{gpr-ts-mode-indent-offset} (default: 3)
Indentation used for
structural visualization
@end table
@vindex gpr-ts-mode-indent-when-offset
@table @asis
@item @code{gpr-ts-mode-indent-when-offset} (default: 3)
Indentation for case
items and comments, relative to a case construction.
@end table
@vindex gpr-ts-mode-indent-broken-offset
@table @asis
@item @code{gpr-ts-mode-indent-broken-offset} (default: 2)
Continuation
indentation when item does not completely reside on a single line.
@end table
@vindex gpr-ts-mode-indent-exp-item-offset
@table @asis
@item @code{gpr-ts-mode-indent-exp-item-offset} (default: 2)
Continuation
indentation for partial expressions (i.e., terms, concatenation,
etc).
@end table

It should be noted that the settings above are defined in terms of
each other, so that by customizing the standard indentation offset
@code{gpr-ts-mode-indent-offset}, the other indentation offsets will be
adjusted accordingly.  In other words, those settings either use the
same value or a value derived from it.  Therefore, customizing the
base value will have an affect on the remaining values as well.  If
this is not the desired outcome, the other offsets should be
customized as well.

Stacking of a list of items on subsequent lines is supported and the
indentation will align stacked items under each other.  This applies
to lists, function call parameters, import lists, discrete choice
lists in case constructions, etc.

Indentation rules used in gpr-ts-mode (as in all tree-sitter based
modes) are based on the syntax of the language.  When what currently
exists in the buffer is not syntactically correct, the in-memory
syntax tree will contain errors, since the buffer doesn't adhere to
the grammar rules of the language (i.e., it contains syntax errors).
Due to these errors, the indentation may not be applied correctly as
the in-memory syntax tree may not accurately reflect the language
(i.e., the tree will contain an @code{ERROR} node instead of a language
specific node) and indentation rules may not be applied when they
should, due to these errors.

To help combat this issue, it is suggested to use functionality that
can help to reduce the number of syntax errors that might exist in the
buffer at a particular point in time.  Functionality such as enabling
@samp{electric-pair-mode} to insert matching parenthesis, quotation marks,
etc. or using snippets (e.g., @uref{https://github.com/brownts/gpr-yasnippets, gpr-yasnippets}) to automatically insert
multi-line control constructs (e.g., project declarations, package
declarations, case statements, etc.) are highly recommended.  Not only
can this help keep your buffer closer to a syntactically correct
state, you also benefit from the productivity gains as well.

@node Navigation / Imenu
@chapter Navigation / Imenu

The following specialized navigation functions exist and are applied
to GPR projects.  Since function declarations don't exist for GPR
project files, this is repurposed to navigate packages and projects
instead.  This repurposing of function to project/package is also
extended to @samp{which-function-mode} support and will show the current
project and package in the mode line, when enabled.

@kindex C-M-a
@table @asis
@item @samp{C-M-a}
Move backward to beginning of package or project
@end table
@kindex C-M-e
@table @asis
@item @samp{C-M-e}
Move forward to next end of package or project
@end table

With the provided Imenu support, additional options are available for
ease of navigation within a single GPR file.  Packages, projects, type
declarations and typed variable declarations are enumerated.

@node Troubleshooting
@chapter Troubleshooting

@menu
* Org Mode Source Code Blocks::
@end menu

@node Org Mode Source Code Blocks
@section Org Mode Source Code Blocks

When Org Mode doesn't know the major mode for the language of a source
block, it will guess by appending ``-mode'' to the end of the language
name.  If we use a language name of ``gpr'', this means it will look for
a major mode named ``gpr-mode''.  This default behavior doesn't work if
we want to use Tree-Sitter enabled modes.  Maybe in the future it will
be aware of these modes, but in the meantime, we can explicitly
configure Org Mode to map to the Tree-Sitter major mode using the
customization variable @samp{org-src-lang-modes}.

The following can be added to your configuration to persist the
setting:

@lisp
(with-eval-after-load 'org-src
  (add-to-list 'org-src-lang-modes '("gpr" . gpr-ts)))
@end lisp

@node Keystroke Index
@appendix Keystroke Index

@printindex ky

@node Variable Index
@appendix Variable Index

@printindex vr

@bye